BOOK TWO

Begin the morning by saying to thyself, I shall meet with the busy-body,
the ungrateful, arrogant, deceitful, envious, unsocial. All these
things happen to them by reason of their ignorance of what is good
and evil. But I who have seen the nature of the good that it is beautiful,
and of the bad that it is ugly, and the nature of him who does wrong,
that it is akin to me, not only of the same blood or seed, but that
it participates in the same intelligence and the same portion of the
divinity, I can neither be injured by any of them, for no one can
fix on me what is ugly, nor can I be angry with my kinsman, nor hate
him, For we are made for co-operation, like feet, like hands, like
eyelids, like the rows of the upper and lower teeth. To act against
one another then is contrary to nature; and it is acting against one
another to be vexed and to turn away.

Whatever this is that I am, it is a little flesh and breath, and the
ruling part. Throw away thy books; no longer distract thyself: it
is not allowed; but as if thou wast now dying, despise the flesh;
it is blood and bones and a network, a contexture of nerves, veins,
and arteries. See the breath also, what kind of a thing it is, air,
and not always the same, but every moment sent out and again sucked
in. The third then is the ruling part: consider thus: Thou art an
old man; no longer let this be a slave, no longer be pulled by the
strings like a puppet to unsocial movements, no longer either be dissatisfied
with thy present lot, or shrink from the future.

All that is from the gods is full of Providence. That which is from
fortune is not separated from nature or without an interweaving and
involution with the things which are ordered by Providence. From thence
all things flow; and there is besides necessity, and that which is
for the advantage of the whole universe, of which thou art a part.
But that is good for every part of nature which the nature of the
whole brings, and what serves to maintain this nature. Now the universe
is preserved, as by the changes of the elements so by the changes
of things compounded of the elements. Let these principles be enough
for thee, let them always be fixed opinions. But cast away the thirst
after books, that thou mayest not die murmuring, but cheerfully, truly,
and from thy heart thankful to the gods.

Remember how long thou hast been putting off these things, and how
often thou hast received an opportunity from the gods, and yet dost
not use it. Thou must now at last perceive of what universe thou art
a part, and of what administrator of the universe thy existence is
an efflux, and that a limit of time is fixed for thee, which if thou
dost not use for clearing away the clouds from thy mind, it will go
and thou wilt go, and it will never return.

Every moment think steadily as a Roman and a man to do what thou hast
in hand with perfect and simple dignity, and feeling of affection,
and freedom, and justice; and to give thyself relief from all other
thoughts. And thou wilt give thyself relief, if thou doest every act
of thy life as if it were the last, laying aside all carelessness
and passionate aversion from the commands of reason, and all hypocrisy,
and self-love, and discontent with the portion which has been given
to thee. Thou seest how few the things are, the which if a man lays
hold of, he is able to live a life which flows in quiet, and is like
the existence of the gods; for the gods on their part will require
nothing more from him who observes these things.

Do wrong to thyself, do wrong to thyself, my soul; but thou wilt no
longer have the opportunity of honouring thyself. Every man's life
is sufficient. But thine is nearly finished, though thy soul reverences
not itself but places thy felicity in the souls of others.

Do the things external which fall upon thee distract thee? Give thyself
time to learn something new and good, and cease to be whirled around.
But then thou must also avoid being carried about the other way. For
those too are triflers who have wearied themselves in life by their
activity, and yet have no object to which to direct every movement,
and, in a word, all their thoughts.

Through not observing what is in the mind of another a man has seldom
been seen to be unhappy; but those who do not observe the movements
of their own minds must of necessity be unhappy.

This thou must always bear in mind, what is the nature of the whole,
and what is my nature, and how this is related to that, and what kind
of a part it is of what kind of a whole; and that there is no one
who hinders thee from always doing and saying the things which are
according to the nature of which thou art a part.

Theophrastus, in his comparison of bad acts- such a comparison as
one would make in accordance with the common notions of mankind- says,
like a true philosopher, that the offences which are committed through
desire are more blameable than those which are committed through anger.
For he who is excited by anger seems to turn away from reason with
a certain pain and unconscious contraction; but he who offends through
desire, being overpowered by pleasure, seems to be in a manner more
intemperate and more womanish in his offences. Rightly then, and in
a way worthy of philosophy, he said that the offence which is committed
with pleasure is more blameable than that which is committed with
pain; and on the whole the one is more like a person who has been
first wronged and through pain is compelled to be angry; but the other
is moved by his own impulse to do wrong, being carried towards doing
something by desire.

Since it is possible that thou mayest depart from life this very moment,
regulate every act and thought accordingly. But to go away from among
men, if there are gods, is not a thing to be afraid of, for the gods
will not involve thee in evil; but if indeed they do not exist, or
if they have no concern about human affairs, what is it to me to live
in a universe devoid of gods or devoid of Providence? But in truth
they do exist, and they do care for human things, and they have put
all the means in man's power to enable him not to fall into real evils.
And as to the rest, if there was anything evil, they would have provided
for this also, that it should be altogether in a man's power not to
fall into it. Now that which does not make a man worse, how can it
make a man's life worse? But neither through ignorance, nor having
the knowledge, but not the power to guard against or correct these
things, is it possible that the nature of the universe has overlooked
them; nor is it possible that it has made so great a mistake, either
through want of power or want of skill, that good and evil should
happen indiscriminately to the good and the bad. But death certainly,
and life, honour and dishonour, pain and pleasure, all these things
equally happen to good men and bad, being things which make us neither
better nor worse. Therefore they are neither good nor evil.

How quickly all things disappear, in the universe the bodies themselves,
but in time the remembrance of them; what is the nature of all sensible
things, and particularly those which attract with the bait of pleasure
or terrify by pain, or are noised abroad by vapoury fame; how worthless,
and contemptible, and sordid, and perishable, and dead they are- all
this it is the part of the intellectual faculty to observe. To observe
too who these are whose opinions and voices give reputation; what
death is, and the fact that, if a man looks at it in itself, and by
the abstractive power of reflection resolves into their parts all
the things which present themselves to the imagination in it, he will
then consider it to be nothing else than an operation of nature; and
if any one is afraid of an operation of nature, he is a child. This,
however, is not only an operation of nature, but it is also a thing
which conduces to the purposes of nature. To observe too how man comes
near to the deity, and by what part of him, and when this part of
man is so disposed.

Nothing is more wretched than a man who traverses everything in a
round, and pries into the things beneath the earth, as the poet says,
and seeks by conjecture what is in the minds of his neighbours, without
perceiving that it is sufficient to attend to the daemon within him,
and to reverence it sincerely. And reverence of the daemon consists
in keeping it pure from passion and thoughtlessness, and dissatisfaction
with what comes from gods and men. For the things from the gods merit
veneration for their excellence; and the things from men should be
dear to us by reason of kinship; and sometimes even, in a manner,
they move our pity by reason of men's ignorance of good and bad; this
defect being not less than that which deprives us of the power of
distinguishing things that are white and black.

Though thou shouldst be going to live three thousand years, and as
many times ten thousand years, still remember that no man loses any
other life than this which he now lives, nor lives any other than
this which he now loses. The longest and shortest are thus brought
to the same. For the present is the same to all, though that which
perishes is not the same; and so that which is lost appears to be
a mere moment. For a man cannot lose either the past or the future:
for what a man has not, how can any one take this from him? These
two things then thou must bear in mind; the one, that all things from
eternity are of like forms and come round in a circle, and that it
makes no difference whether a man shall see the same things during
a hundred years or two hundred, or an infinite time; and the second,
that the longest liver and he who will die soonest lose just the same.
For the present is the only thing of which a man can be deprived,
if it is true that this is the only thing which he has, and that a
man cannot lose a thing if he has it not.

Remember that all is opinion. For what was said by the Cynic Monimus
is manifest: and manifest too is the use of what was said, if a man
receives what may be got out of it as far as it is true.

The soul of man does violence to itself, first of all, when it becomes
an abscess and, as it were, a tumour on the universe, so far as it
can. For to be vexed at anything which happens is a separation of
ourselves from nature, in some part of which the natures of all other
things are contained. In the next place, the soul does violence to
itself when it turns away from any man, or even moves towards him
with the intention of injuring, such as are the souls of those who
are angry. In the third place, the soul does violence to itself when
it is overpowered by pleasure or by pain. Fourthly, when it plays
a part, and does or says anything insincerely and untruly. Fifthly,
when it allows any act of its own and any movement to be without an
aim, and does anything thoughtlessly and without considering what
it is, it being right that even the smallest things be done with reference
to an end; and the end of rational animals is to follow the reason
and the law of the most ancient city and polity.

Of human life the time is a point, and the substance is in a flux,
and the perception dull, and the composition of the whole body subject
to putrefaction, and the soul a whirl, and fortune hard to divine,
and fame a thing devoid of judgement. And, to say all in a word, everything
which belongs to the body is a stream, and what belongs to the soul
is a dream and vapour, and life is a warfare and a stranger's sojourn,
and after-fame is oblivion. What then is that which is able to conduct
a man? One thing and only one, philosophy. But this consists in keeping
the daemon within a man free from violence and unharmed, superior
to pains and pleasures, doing nothing without purpose, nor yet falsely
and with hypocrisy, not feeling the need of another man's doing or
not doing anything; and besides, accepting all that happens, and all
that is allotted, as coming from thence, wherever it is, from whence
he himself came; and, finally, waiting for death with a cheerful mind,
as being nothing else than a dissolution of the elements of which
every living being is compounded. But if there is no harm to the elements
themselves in each continually changing into another, why should a
man have any apprehension about the change and dissolution of all
the elements? For it is according to nature, and nothing is evil which
is according to nature.

This in Carnuntum.


We ought to consider not only that our life is daily wasting away
and a smaller part of it is left, but another thing also must be taken
into the account, that if a man should live longer, it is quite uncertain
whether the understanding will still continue sufficient for the comprehension
of things, and retain the power of contemplation which strives to
acquire the knowledge of the divine and the human. For if he shall
begin to fall into dotage, perspiration and nutrition and imagination
and appetite, and whatever else there is of the kind, will not fail;
but the power of making use of ourselves, and filling up the measure
of our duty, and clearly separating all appearances, and considering
whether a man should now depart from life, and whatever else of the
kind absolutely requires a disciplined reason, all this is already
extinguished. We must make haste then, not only because we are daily
nearer to death, but also because the conception of things and the
understanding of them cease first.

We ought to observe also that even the things which follow after the
things which are produced according to nature contain something pleasing
and attractive. For instance, when bread is baked some parts are split
at the surface, and these parts which thus open, and have a certain
fashion contrary to the purpose of the baker's art, are beautiful
in a manner, and in a peculiar way excite a desire for eating. And
again, figs, when they are quite ripe, gape open; and in the ripe
olives the very circumstance of their being near to rottenness adds
a peculiar beauty to the fruit. And the ears of corn bending down,
and the lion's eyebrows, and the foam which flows from the mouth of
wild boars, and many other things- though they are far from being
beautiful, if a man should examine them severally- still, because
they are consequent upon the things which are formed by nature, help
to adorn them, and they please the mind; so that if a man should have
a feeling and deeper insight with respect to the things which are
produced in the universe, there is hardly one of those which follow
by way of consequence which will not seem to him to be in a manner
disposed so as to give pleasure. And so he will see even the real
gaping jaws of wild beasts with no less pleasure than those which
painters and sculptors show by imitation; and in an old woman and
an old man he will be able to see a certain maturity and comeliness;
and the attractive loveliness of young persons he will be able to
look on with chaste eyes; and many such things will present themselves,
not pleasing to every man, but to him only who has become truly familiar
with nature and her works.

Hippocrates after curing many diseases himself fell sick and died.
The Chaldaei foretold the deaths of many, and then fate caught them
too. Alexander, and Pompeius, and Caius Caesar, after so often completely
destroying whole cities, and in battle cutting to pieces many ten
thousands of cavalry and infantry, themselves too at last departed
from life. Heraclitus, after so many speculations on the conflagration
of the universe, was filled with water internally and died smeared
all over with mud. And lice destroyed Democritus; and other lice killed
Socrates. What means all this? Thou hast embarked, thou hast made
the voyage, thou art come to shore; get out. If indeed to another
life, there is no want of gods, not even there. But if to a state
without sensation, thou wilt cease to be held by pains and pleasures,
and to be a slave to the vessel, which is as much inferior as that
which serves it is superior: for the one is intelligence and deity;
the other is earth and corruption.

Do not waste the remainder of thy life in thoughts about others, when
thou dost not refer thy thoughts to some object of common utility.
For thou losest the opportunity of doing something else when thou
hast such thoughts as these, What is such a person doing, and why,
and what is he saying, and what is he thinking of, and what is he
contriving, and whatever else of the kind makes us wander away from
the observation of our own ruling power. We ought then to check in
the series of our thoughts everything that is without a purpose and
useless, but most of all the over-curious feeling and the malignant;
and a man should use himself to think of those things only about which
if one should suddenly ask, What hast thou now in thy thoughts? With
perfect openness thou mightest, immediately answer, This or That;
so that from thy words it should be plain that everything in thee
is simple and benevolent, and such as befits a social animal, and
one that cares not for thoughts about pleasure or sensual enjoyments
at all, nor has any rivalry or envy and suspicion, or anything else
for which thou wouldst blush if thou shouldst say that thou hadst
it in thy mind. For the man who is such and no longer delays being
among the number of the best, is like a priest and minister of the
gods, using too the deity which is planted within him, which makes
the man uncontaminated by pleasure, unharmed by any pain, untouched
by any insult, feeling no wrong, a fighter in the noblest fight, one
who cannot be overpowered by any passion, dyed deep with justice,
accepting with all his soul everything which happens and is assigned
to him as his portion; and not often, nor yet without great necessity
and for the general interest, imagining what another says, or does,
or thinks. For it is only what belongs to himself that he makes the
matter for his activity; and he constantly thinks of that which is
allotted to himself out of the sum total of things, and he makes his
own acts fair, and he is persuaded that his own portion is good. For
the lot which is assigned to each man is carried along with him and
carries him along with it. And he remembers also that every rational
animal is his kinsman, and that to care for all men is according to
man's nature; and a man should hold on to the opinion not of all,
but of those only who confessedly live according to nature. But as
to those who live not so, he always bears in mind what kind of men
they are both at home and from home, both by night and by day, and
what they are, and with what men they live an impure life. Accordingly,
he does not value at all the praise which comes from such men, since
they are not even satisfied with themselves.

Labour not unwillingly, nor without regard to the common interest,
nor without due consideration, nor with distraction; nor let studied
ornament set off thy thoughts, and be not either a man of many words,
or busy about too many things. And further, let the deity which is
in thee be the guardian of a living being, manly and of ripe age,
and engaged in matter political, and a Roman, and a ruler, who has
taken his post like a man waiting for the signal which summons him
from life, and ready to go, having need neither of oath nor of any
man's testimony. Be cheerful also, and seek not external help nor
the tranquility which others give. A man then must stand erect, not
be kept erect by others.

If thou findest in human life anything better than justice, truth,
temperance, fortitude, and, in a word, anything better than thy own
mind's self-satisfaction in the things which it enables thee to do
according to right reason, and in the condition that is assigned to
thee without thy own choice; if, I say, thou seest anything better
than this, turn to it with all thy soul, and enjoy that which thou
hast found to be the best. But if nothing appears to be better than
the deity which is planted in thee, which has subjected to itself
all thy appetites, and carefully examines all the impressions, and,
as Socrates said, has detached itself from the persuasions of sense,
and has submitted itself to the gods, and cares for mankind; if thou
findest everything else smaller and of less value than this, give
place to nothing else, for if thou dost once diverge and incline to
it, thou wilt no longer without distraction be able to give the preference
to that good thing which is thy proper possession and thy own; for
it is not right that anything of any other kind, such as praise from
the many, or power, or enjoyment of pleasure, should come into competition
with that which is rationally and politically or practically good.
All these things, even though they may seem to adapt themselves to
the better things in a small degree, obtain the superiority all at
once, and carry us away. But do thou, I say, simply and freely choose
the better, and hold to it.- But that which is useful is the better.-
Well then, if it is useful to thee as a rational being, keep to it;
but if it is only useful to thee as an animal, say so, and maintain
thy judgement without arrogance: only take care that thou makest the
inquiry by a sure method.

Never value anything as profitable to thyself which shall compel thee
to break thy promise, to lose thy self-respect, to hate any man, to
suspect, to curse, to act the hypocrite, to desire anything which
needs walls and curtains: for he who has preferred to everything intelligence
and daemon and the worship of its excellence, acts no tragic part,
does not groan, will not need either solitude or much company; and,
what is chief of all, he will live without either pursuing or flying
from death; but whether for a longer or a shorter time he shall have
the soul inclosed in the body, he cares not at all: for even if he
must depart immediately, he will go as readily as if he were going
to do anything else which can be done with decency and order; taking
care of this only all through life, that his thoughts turn not away
from anything which belongs to an intelligent animal and a member
of a civil community.

In the mind of one who is chastened and purified thou wilt find no
corrupt matter, nor impurity, nor any sore skinned over. Nor is his
life incomplete when fate overtakes him, as one may say of an actor
who leaves the stage before ending and finishing the play. Besides,
there is in him nothing servile, nor affected, nor too closely bound
to other things, nor yet detached from other things, nothing worthy
of blame, nothing which seeks a hiding-place.

Reverence the faculty which produces opinion. On this faculty it entirely
depends whether there shall exist in thy ruling part any opinion inconsistent
with nature and the constitution of the rational animal. And this
faculty promises freedom from hasty judgement, and friendship towards
men, and obedience to the gods.

Throwing away then all things, hold to these only which are few; and
besides bear in mind that every man lives only this present time,
which is an indivisible point, and that all the rest of his life is
either past or it is uncertain. Short then is the time which every
man lives, and small the nook of the earth where he lives; and short
too the longest posthumous fame, and even this only continued by a
succession of poor human beings, who will very soon die, and who know
not even themselves, much less him who died long ago.

To the aids which have been mentioned let this one still be added:-
Make for thyself a definition or description of the thing which is
presented to thee, so as to see distinctly what kind of a thing it
is in its substance, in its nudity, in its complete entirety, and
tell thyself its proper name, and the names of the things of which
it has been compounded, and into which it will be resolved. For nothing
is so productive of elevation of mind as to be able to examine methodically
and truly every object which is presented to thee in life, and always
to look at things so as to see at the same time what kind of universe
this is, and what kind of use everything performs in it, and what
value everything has with reference to the whole, and what with reference
to man, who is a citizen of the highest city, of which all other cities
are like families; what each thing is, and of what it is composed,
and how long it is the nature of this thing to endure which now makes
an impression on me, and what virtue I have need of with respect to
it, such as gentleness, manliness, truth, fidelity, simplicity, contentment,
and the rest. Wherefore, on every occasion a man should say: this
comes from God; and this is according to the apportionment and spinning
of the thread of destiny, and such-like coincidence and chance; and
this is from one of the same stock, and a kinsman and partner, one
who knows not however what is according to his nature. But I know;
for this reason I behave towards him according to the natural law
of fellowship with benevolence and justice. At the same time however
in things indifferent I attempt to ascertain the value of each.

If thou workest at that which is before thee, following right reason
seriously, vigorously, calmly, without allowing anything else to distract
thee, but keeping thy divine part pure, as if thou shouldst be bound
to give it back immediately; if thou holdest to this, expecting nothing,
fearing nothing, but satisfied with thy present activity according
to nature, and with heroic truth in every word and sound which thou
utterest, thou wilt live happy. And there is no man who is able to
prevent this.

As physicians have always their instruments and knives ready for cases
which suddenly require their skill, so do thou have principles ready
for the understanding of things divine and human, and for doing everything,
even the smallest, with a recollection of the bond which unites the
divine and human to one another. For neither wilt thou do anything
well which pertains to man without at the same time having a reference
to things divine; nor the contrary.

No longer wander at hazard; for neither wilt thou read thy own memoirs,
nor the acts of the ancient Romans and Hellenes, and the selections
from books which thou wast reserving for thy old age. Hasten then
to the end which thou hast before thee, and throwing away idle hopes,
come to thy own aid, if thou carest at all for thyself, while it is
in thy power.

They know not how many things are signified by the words stealing,
sowing, buying, keeping quiet, seeing what ought to be done; for this
is not effected by the eyes, but by another kind of vision.

Body, soul, intelligence: to the body belong sensations, to the soul
appetites, to the intelligence principles. To receive the impressions
of forms by means of appearances belongs even to animals; to be pulled
by the strings of desire belongs both to wild beasts and to men who
have made themselves into women, and to a Phalaris and a Nero: and
to have the intelligence that guides to the things which appear suitable
belongs also to those who do not believe in the gods, and who betray
their country, and do their impure deeds when they have shut the doors.
If then everything else is common to all that I have mentioned, there
remains that which is peculiar to the good man, to be pleased and
content with what happens, and with the thread which is spun for him;
and not to defile the divinity which is planted in his breast, nor
disturb it by a crowd of images, but to preserve it tranquil, following
it obediently as a god, neither saying anything contrary to the truth,
nor doing anything contrary to justice. And if all men refuse to believe
that he lives a simple, modest, and contented life, he is neither
angry with any of them, nor does he deviate from the way which leads
to the end of life, to which a man ought to come pure, tranquil, ready
to depart, and without any compulsion perfectly reconciled to his
lot.